Code of conduct template set (#246)
thegooddocsproject/templates: code-of-conduct/template-code-of-conduct-response-plan.md

# Code of Conduct response plan template

---
The Code of Conduct response plan template includes:

* Placeholder text that you can replace with your own text. This text is indicated in {curly braces}.
* Writing instructions, also in {curly braces}.

> * An accompanying `template-code-of-conduct.md` template that should be used to create your Code of Conduct at the same time you create your Code of Conduct response.

Reviewer: Query: technically, the template doesn't "include" the accompanying guide. Only just noticed this. Maybe you want to fix here, and on the other templates as well.

> * See the accompanying `code-of-conduct-guide.md` file for more detailed information about using these templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

See the accompanying `code-of-conduct-guide.md` file for more detailed information about using these templates.

```
Doesn't match with the stem sentence "...includes:"

---

This document explains:

> - How to contact the current {Project name} community moderators, such as to report a [Code of Conduct](code-of-conduct.md) incident).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How to contact the current {Project name} community moderators to report a [Code of Conduct](code-of-conduct.md) incident.

```
grammar: The "such as" construction isn't right here.

- The policies and procedures that community moderators should follow when responding to a Code of Conduct incident.
- Additional governing policies for the community moderator team (also sometimes referred to as the “Code of Conduct committee”).

## Community moderators

For a list of the current {Project name} community moderators and the best way to reach them, see [Community Moderators](our-team.md).
You may contact any of these individuals to make a Code of Conduct incident report.

{Instead of linking to a separate page, you could list the names of the community moderators and their preferred contact information.}

## Contacting a community moderator

You can contact a community moderator to make a Code of Conduct incident report or to discuss the process and options related to Code of Conduct incidents.

> To make an incident report, send a message to the community moderator that has the best working relationship with you and with whom you feel most comfortable talking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make an incident report, send a message to the community moderator that you you have the best working relationship with and feel most comfortable talking to.

```
suggestion: I stumbled over this construction. I'm inclined to make the whole thing plainer. And yes, end the sentence with a preposition (gasp!).

To contact a moderator, please {describe your preferred contact method, such as sending a direct private message on Slack or some other method}.
Community moderators will respond as soon as they possibly can.
They might also request a one-on-one meeting with you (such as a phone call or online video conference) to get more information about the incident.

## Community moderator values

Community moderators should strive to:

> - Occupy a position of trust and good rapport within {Project name} community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Occupy a position of trust within {Project name} community, and build rapport with community members.

```
suggestion: good rapport is tautological. Rapport is a type of relationship you hold or have or build with people (members). You could add that verb in to the original construction, but then it doesn't fit with "within". So I suggested an alternative.

- Commit to a day or half-day formal training in incident response skills within {required time period} of joining the moderator team. Formal training involves taking an online training course in incident response skills, mediation, or arbitration. Or it could also involve participating in an informal workshop in incident response skills led by a current {Project name} moderator. Upon joining the moderator team, the new moderator can work with other moderators to develop a training plan and ensure this training requirement is met.
- Be recommended for the team by either another community moderator or a member of the {Project name} core team. Nominated individuals should demonstrate the values and qualities necessary to carry out the responsibilities of community moderators. Note that {Project name} community members may first volunteer for consideration and then seek a recommendation afterwards.
- Be active contributors to the {Project name} who have participated in the community for at least three months. Contributions can include authoring pull requests, submitting issues, attending meetings regularly, and participating in {Project name} community forums.

> - Cannot be subject of an ongoing {Project name} Code of Conduct incident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Not be subject of an ongoing {Project name} Code of Conduct incident.

```
suggestion: to make it fit with the stem sentence "...moderators must:"

## Community moderator terms of service

The {Project name} community moderator team should consist of 3-5 community members at a given time.

> To prevent burnout, community moderators should serve for a recommended term limit of {time period}, unless there have been little or no incidents in that space of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent burnout, community moderators should serve for a recommended term limit of {time period}, unless there have been few or no incidents in that space of time.

```
suggestion: incidents are countable objects.

Community members should stagger terms of service to ensure there is some continuity on the team over time.
Community moderators may return to serve second terms after a break from service.
If possible, outgoing community moderators should recommend a replacement from the community.

## Reviewing the Code of Conduct

> The Code of Conduct and this document (the community moderators document) should be reviewed by the moderator team at least once a year, typically in {time period}, to ensure these documents are meeting the needs of the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Code of Conduct and this document (the Code of Conduct Response Plan) should be reviewed by the moderator team at least once a year, typically in {time period}, to ensure these documents are meeting the needs of the community.

```
suggestion: please check document name. Have I misunderstood?

> The {Project name} community will notify the community of any revisions by publicizing the revisions in the community’s forums of communication on both Slack and the groups.io mailing list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {Project name} community will notify the community of any revisions by publicizing the revisions in the community’s forums of communication.

```
suggestion: remove this - it looks to be specific to The Good Docs project rather than generic. Should there be something in curly braces here instead?

Reviewer 2: Second this suggestion if there's time to make it. Could be "and {other contact method}" or something similar?

## Key terms used in this document

> This section provides a definition of key terms and roles that appear in the incident response policy that follows this section:

Reviewer: Suggestion for this section: Move all "also knowns as" and "sometimes referred to" wording. Make the definition first. End the sentence. Then add the AKA wording as its own sentence following. 
As a reader, my eyes want the definition to immediately follow the bold bullet point.

- **Incident report** - Also sometimes referred to as the “report,” an incident report begins when a member of the {Project name} reports behavior that violates the community Code of Conduct. The incident report refers to the violating behavior that is then investigated by community moderators.
- **Incident reporter** - Also sometimes referred to as the “reporter,” the incident reporter is the person who reports a Code of Conduct violation to a community moderator.
- **Handling an incident report** - Also known as “investigating a report,” handling an incident report is the process of investigating and resolving an incident report as explained using the processes and guidelines in the subsequent sections.
- **Investigating moderator** - Also known as the “investigator,” the investigating moderator is the community moderator who will handle the incident report and ensure the report moves through all six stages.
- **Accused individual** - The accused individual is the person who is alleged to have violated the Code of Conduct.

> - **Escrowed reports** - If an incident reporter does not give permission to proceed with an investigation, they will be given the option to hold the report “in escrow.” Escrowed reports will not be acted upon until there is a second report of the same incident or a similar incident involving the same individual. The goal of an escrow report is to retain a record of incidents in case there is a pattern of misbehavior by the same individual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Escrowed reports** - An incident report where the reporter has not given permission to proceed with an investigation. Escrowed reports are not acted upon until there is a second report of the same incident or a similar incident involving the same individual. The goal is to retain a record of incidents in case there is a pattern of misbehavior by the same individual.

```
quibble: My eyes wanted a definition and the "if" at the start of the first sentence felt like too much cognitive load. I made a suggestion but you're the experts.

## Handling incident reports

An incident report begins when a member of {Project name} contacts a community moderator to report an incident.
The moderator who is contacted should handle the incident report and should try to respond as soon as possible.
This moderator will become the investigating moderator.

The investigating moderator may involve another community moderator as an additional investigator or as a replacement investigator under these conditions:

- If the moderator who was contacted by the incident reporter does not feel comfortable investigating and handling the incident alone.
- If the moderator cannot handle the incident in a timely manner and must ask a different moderator to investigate the incident report.

> - If the moderator needs to be recused because of a conflict of interest.

Reviewer: I didn't realize until I got to the bottom that we have a section on conflicts of interest. Could we link to that anchor point here? It might be helpful.

If the moderator who was contacted by an incident reporter intends to involve an additional community moderator for support or as a replacement, they should first inform the incident reporter, explain the circumstances, and offer the opportunity to withdraw their incident report if they are uncomfortable having another moderator involved.

To promote impartiality, if the incident reporter is a community moderator themselves, then a different community moderator must handle the report.
See [#preventing-conflicts-of-interest](Preventing conflicts of interest) for more information.

### Overview

All incident reports have six stages:

1. Listen
2. Triage
3. Recommend
4. Respond
5. Follow up
6. Resolve

> See the following sections for more information about what occurs in each phase.

Reviewer: Is this sentence really necessary?

### Listen

During the listening phase, the investigating moderator will:

- Listen to the incident reporter’s explanation of the Code of Conduct violation.
- Explain the available outcomes.
- Obtain permission to proceed to the next steps in the investigation.
- Fill out the {link to your [Code of Conduct incident record](code-of-conduct-incident-record.md)}. NOTE: This record can be filled out after taking the report if needed.

Throughout the process, the investigating moderator will treat the reporter’s identity as confidential and will only disclose their identity to other moderators on a need-to-know basis.

The investigating moderator should talk directly to the person who reported the incident either through an online video conference or by phone.

During this meeting, the investigating moderator should:

- Note the reporter’s name and contact information.
- If possible, note the incident’s date, time, and/or location.

> - Listen carefully to the incident reporter and get a complete understanding of the incident, its context, and the parties involved. The moderator should strive to listen with empathy and understanding. They should default to believing the incident responder.

Reviewer: query: The sentence: "They should default to believing the incident responder." seems important and we didn't mention it in the incident report doc or its guide (not sure which one it would go in). I feel like the other points listed here were also covered there, but this one is missing. Just checking. 

```suggestion
- Listen carefully to the incident reporter and get a complete understanding of the incident, its context, and the parties involved. The moderator should strive to listen with empathy and understanding. They should default to believing the incident responder.

```

        <li>Repeated medium- or low-level offenses by the same individual are also automatically designated as high severity.</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Sexual assault or unwanted sexual attention</li>
        <li>Violent threats or language</li>
        <li>Personal attacks</li>
        <li>Derogatory language (especially aimed at marginalized groups)</li>
        <li>Repeated inappropriate comments after a warning</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Medium</td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>The incident is moderately severe and is potentially disruptive to the community.</li>
        <li>The incident could possibly cause one or more community members to feel unwelcome or uncomfortable in the community.</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Mildly inappropriate comments or jokes</li>
        <li>Bullying</li>
        <li>Tone-policing</li>
        <li>Repeatedly dominating a conversation (such as repeatedly talking over another person or not inviting discussion from others where appropriate)</li>
        <li>Excessive profanity</li>
        <li>Sustained disruptions of community events</li>

>     </td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     </ul>
    </td>

```
suggestion: no biggie, but there's no closing ul tag.

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Low</td>
    <td>The incident is minor in nature and doesn’t pose serious harm or risk of harm.</td>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Heated discussions or disagreements between community members.</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

**Impact levels**

> Impact refers to how public the incident was and the number of community members who were or who could have been impacted by the incident, especially members of marginalized communities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Impact refers to how public the incident was and the number of community members who were or who could have been impacted by the incident—especially members of marginalized communities:

```
nitpick: I would em dash this but what does our style guide say?

The moderator may invite an additional moderator to attend the meeting if support is desired.

Before this meeting, the investigating moderator should fill out the [Code of Conduct remediation record](code-of-conduct-remediation-record.md) and use this document to guide the meeting.

In this meeting, the moderator should explain the nature of the reported incident and the specifics of the incident response (correction, warning, temporary ban, permanent ban).
The accused individual will be given a chance to respond (within reason) and will be informed about the process for appealing the incident response.

If a new Code of Conduct violation occurs in this meeting (such as a derogatory or threatening comment made to a community moderator or about another member of the community), it should be treated as a separate incident and should be reported as a new incident to the community moderators.

If the individual wishes to appeal the incident response, the community moderator can send them a link to this document for information.

> Ensure that the individual is aware that they must still comply with the incident response plan as the appeal process is underway.

Reviewer: The "as" in this sentence is ambiguous. Do we mean while or because?
```suggestion
Ensure that the individual is aware that they must still comply with the incident response plan as the appeal process is underway.

```

To protect the identity of the incident reporter, the accused individual must not be given the identity of the incident reporter nor will they be allowed to contact the incident reporter, even to apologize.
If an apology is required as part of the response, the following options are permissible:

- The apology can be delivered to the investigating community moderator who will then deliver it to the incident reporter.
- The apology may be delivered in a public forum with permission from the investigating community moderator.

> During or immediately after the meeting, the investigating moderator should fill out the any additional notes on the the [Code of Conduct remediation record](code-of-conduct-remediation-record) to ensure that all information from the meeting has been accurately captured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During or immediately after the meeting, the investigating moderator should fill out any additional notes on the [Code of Conduct remediation record](code-of-conduct-remediation-record) to ensure that all information from the meeting has been accurately captured.

```
Typo

### Resolve

The investigating moderator should implement the consequence(s) of the incident response, depending on what the response was.
The moderator should also follow up with the incident reporter to let them know what the outcome of the report was.

If a temporary ban was implemented, a community moderator who handled the incident should meet with the accused individual to ensure compliance before readmittance into the community.

All documentation should be filed in the {describe where your documents are kept}:

- The [Code of Conduct incident record](code-of-conduct-incident-record.md) form.
- The [Code of Conduct remediation record](code-of-conduct-remediation-record.md) form.

> It is important to file this documentation to enable the community moderators to identify and prevent potential repeated patterns of abuse.

Reviewer: I stumble over the use of "file" here. I think we mean, store or keep? The "file" in the previous sentence works well.

## Handling incident appeals

If an accused individual wants to dispute the decision of the community moderators, that individual is entitled to one appeal.
An appeal can be requested directly from the community moderators using the same process of reporting an incident.
That means that the accused individual can send a direct message to one of the community moderators to request an appeal.
While the appeal process is underway, the accused individual must still comply with the incident response plan.

When an appeal is requested, 2-3 members of {Project name} {team name} will review the incident documentation and the reason for the appeal.
They will consult with the community moderators about the investigation and decision-making process to determine if the Code of Conduct was fairly and properly applied.
They will then recommend to uphold, modify, or reverse the original incident response.

> Decisions made by the {Project name} {team name} are final.

Reviewer: The {team name} mentioned here feels like a new concept. Is this the first time it's been used? I don't recall seeing it mentioned before. But perhaps I'm wrong.
